# Exercise I

**Getting started with CATE**

*This exercise demonstrates how to access CCI datasets and perform
simple visualisation and analysis operations on essential climate
variables using CATE.*

Now that you have learnt what CATE is, reviewed the installation of the 
Jupyter notebook and called CATE functionalities from it, you will move on 
to learn how to access, download, and perform simple visualisation and 
analysis operations on CCI data records of essential climate variables 
using CATE SaaS.

CATE provides a platform from which you can access the full archive of 
the [Open Data Portal](https://climate.esa.int/en/odp/#/dashboard) 
and carry out visualisation and analysis operations. So let us start 
with data sources and access.

## Data Sources

After you have logged in to CATE, The *DATA SOURCES* panel is located at
the at the top right (Figure 1).

![Figure 1](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image1.png#center)

*Figure 1: Open data source.*

It is used to browse for and open CCI datasets. Using the drop-down list
located at the top of the panel it is possible to switch between three
data stores:

1.  **CCI Open Data Portal** A remote data store that provides access to
    all published CCI datasets. Internally the
    [*OPeNDAP*](https://www.opendap.org/) service of the ESA CCI Open
    Data Portal is used. Some of these datasets cannot be opened with
    CATE, and they are only visible when the option *All data sources*
    is checked (see the warning tooltip for more information).

2.  **CCI Zarr Store (experimental)** A data store which provides access
    to ODP data that has been converted to the ZARR format. Datasets
    from this data store can be opened, displayed and processed
    significantly quicker than datasets from the CCI ODP Store, but
    there is only a limited number of datasets available.

3.  **File Data Sources** A data store that allows you to store data
    online in your dedicated workspace. You may either upload your own
    data and register it as a new data source, or cache data from the
    CCI Open Data Portal.

Selecting a data source entry will allow displaying its details, namely
the available (geo-physical) variables and the meta-data associated with
the data source. Now we will explain how to work with the data sources.

Select from the ESA CCI Open Data Portal the dataset with the title 
*ESA Aerosol Climate Change Initiative (Aerosol_cci): Level 3 aerosol 
products from the Multi-Sensor UV Absorbing Aerosol Index (MS UVAI) 
algorithm, Version 1.7*. CATE will load data explaining the data source 
in the *Details* section of the panel (see Figure 2). 
There you can also find a link to the dataset\'s catalogue entry. 

The full archive of data is located at <https://climate.esa.int/odp/>. 
There you might also find datasets that are not yet accessible via the ODP/Cate.

![Figure 2](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image2.png#center)

*Figure 2: The Data Source Panel*

Next, open the data by clicking on the *Open Data Source* button
(indicated by a red circle in Figure 2). You can select (and you are
advised to do so) region, time, and variable constraint (Figure 3).
Select a small region and the full-time record of observation. You also
have the option to cache the data and assign a new name to it. If you
cache it, a copy of the data source will be put into the File Data
Sources data store.

![Figure 3](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image3.png#center)

*Figure 3: CATE\'s Open Dialog*

If you have selected a spatial, temporal or variable subset, a subset
will be cached. If you close Cate and log in back at some alter point,
the cached data source will still be available. Working on cached data
is faster, but the caching process itself takes some time, depending on
the amount of data to be cached.

After confirming the dialog, a download task will be started. Once the
download is finished, a notification will be shown, and the dataset will
be displayed on the world view (Figure 4). If you had checked the
caching option, a new local data source will be available in the *File
Data Sources* data store.

![Figure 4](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image4.png#center)

*Figure 4: The Aerosol Dataset after opening*

## Data Analysis

This section shows how you can access CCI data and use CATE operations
to visualise and analyse the data. By doing so, the Absorbing Aerosol
Index will be explained.

### Open and visualise data

By now you should have opened the Aerosol dataset. Note that you can
open it multiple times, with, e.g., different subset parameters. The
following steps are performed best with a subset of a temporal period of
about one year.

At the top of the right panel you see the workspace with an overview
about the operations you performed and its results. Right now, it should
list the times you opened a dataset.

At the bottom of the right panel is a list of variables contained in
this data source. You can select any variable. In the panel, detailed
information about the variable is shown. If the variable has latitude
and longitude dimensions, it will be directly visualised on the globe.
You can explore any region on earth by rotating the globe and zooming
into areas of interest.

Choose any point on earth and right-click to place a point marker
(Figure 5). A green rectangle will indicate that this placemark is now
selected.

![Figure 5](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image5.png#center)

*Figure 5: Visualising with CATE and placing a point marker.*

In the *VARIABLES* panel on the right, click *Create a time-series plot
from selected placemark* (Figure 6). When computation has finished, a
plot will be opened (Figure 7).

![Figure 6](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image6.png#center)

*Figure 6: Create a time series plot from the selected placemark.*

![Figure 7](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image7.png#center)

*Figure 7: The Time-Series for the selected place marker*

You can compare with a different region of the world by putting another
placemark (Figure 8) and creating a time series for it. A new tab with
the time series plot of the second place marker will appear (Figure 9).

![Figure 8](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image8.png#center)

*Figure 8: Placing a second marker*

![Figure 9](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image9.png#center)

*Figure 9: Time series at the second place marker*

There are two main features to learn from this example:

1.  The Absorbing Aerosol Index (AAI) is a qualitative quantity that
    shows the presence of absorbing aerosols. In this case, the
    ultraviolet (UV) spectral range is used to detect the presence of
    UV-absorbing aerosols in the atmosphere. Positive values indicate
    the presence of absorbing aerosol like smoke and dust while small or
    negative values represent non-absorbing aerosols and clouds. The
    values of AAI are dependent on aerosol properties but also on sensor
    characteristics, and retrieval conditions (solar zenith angle and
    surface albedo).

2.  Different locations will have different values and time series. For
    example, comparing the time series in Figures 6 and 7, we can
    observe that in Europe (place marker 1), scattering aerosol is
    present.

To appreciate the presented time series, you can plot the histogram of
the global climatology values of AAI (Figure 9).

![Figure 10](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image10.png#center)

*Figure 10: Create a histogram plot*

Now one can immediately notice that in our example the time series of
Figure 7 and Figure 9 represent extreme values. The values of Figure 7
are located at the right-end of the histogram, whereas the values of
Figure 9 are located at the left-end.

![Figure 11](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CCI-Tools/cate-edu/main/MOOC/images_E123/media/image11.png#center)

*Figure 11: Histogram of the global climatology values 
of absorbing aerosol index.*

## Up next

Congratulations, you have reached the end of this activity and the week! 
Now let us review the knowledge you acquired during this first week.
